Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. How many science fiction works feature
spacecraft capable of planet hopping, interstellar travel, or even galaxy
galloping? Yet in our experience, we know it takes several days' travel to reach
even the moon, and years to reach the nearest planets. Travel to the stars is
presently unthinkable. In space opera, the writer usually invokes some kind of
faster-than-light drive, which glosses over the basics of the special theory of
relativity. We asked physicist and science fiction writer Robert Forward how it
may be possible to travel faster than light. When you talk about going faster
than light, really what you want to do is get from here to there, without
traveling all the steps in between. If you can do that, then you can go faster
than light. There's two ways, at least, that I know to do that. One is to find a
space warp. You jump into the space warp, you go into a hyperspace, and then you
come out of another space warp somewhere else in our universe. And if you can do
that in a time shorter than it takes you to travel over the top line, then
you've done that. An amazing thing about it is the Einstein general theory of
relativity has space warps in it. Going through a space warp is one way to get
around the speed of light limit. And what's the second way? Then the other way
to go faster than the speed of light is to destroy the space between you and
where you want to go. Now this space drive theory was invented by a student of
Roger Penrose. He's a scientific expert and relativist that works with Hawking
on gravitation. He's working on a thing called twister theory. And in the
twister theory, the real universe is not what we see. That's only a reduced
image of it. The real universe is an eight-dimensional universe that's made up
of twisters. And the twisters not only make up all the particles in the space
and time that we live in, it even makes up the space and the time. It takes a
certain collection of twisters to make up a point in space. It takes another
collection of twisters to make up a point in time. This collection of twisters
is a fairly uniform thing, and that's why we see space as it is, according to
Penrose. Now we don't know whether the twister theory is correct, but Roger is
hoping that it will turn out to be an accurate method, I mean, accurate theory
for the universe. So how does one build a faster-than-light drive based on the
twister theory of Penrose and his students? If you warp the twister space too
much, give it a real strong warp, then it's no longer ordered well enough to
make a piece of space or a piece of time. So if you take a piece of twister
space and you warp it badly, the space and the time that it used to make now
disappears. It's no longer there. So their version of a different kind of a
faster-than-light drive is you take a spacecraft up, you get it out in the way
from the planets and so forth, and then you turn on the twister warping machine
in your spacecraft on the side towards Alpha Centauri, and you just warp that
space so much that you warp that twister space so much that the space-time
between here and Alpha Centauri disappears. And what you'll see if you're
sitting in a spacecraft is that all of a sudden Alpha Centauri just come right
towards you, and then pretty soon you look out one window, you see the sun, you
look out the other window, you'll see Alpha Centauri. Then the machine inside
the spacecraft unwarps the space, but on the other side of the spacecraft, and
all that space now reappears between the spacecraft and the sun. You watch the
sun recede off into the distance while you stay there with Alpha Centauri. So
that's another way to get there. You just get rid of the space between here and
there.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. No other field has fans as distinctive and
intense, some would even say as fanatical, as science fiction does. Every year
there are hundreds of conventions around the country, from small local affairs
to the Incredible World Convention, at which fans gather. They come for various
reasons, of course. To socialize with like-minded people, to meet science
fiction and fantasy authors, to buy books at the dealer's tables. There's one
particular type of fan with a special, consuming interest, costuming and
masquerade. Most conventions, therefore, have a masquerade section, a contest
for fans who have made and presented a costume from some science fiction or
fantasy work. The Science Fiction Radio Show spoke with Teresa Patterson, a fan
who has won numerous awards for her science fiction and fantasy costuming. She
says a few years ago she was hooked on Star Trek, but do nothing about fandom.
But one day after Star Trek, there was a big advertisement for a Star Trek
convention in Dallas. And it was going to have some of the stars there and
everything, and I'd never heard of such a thing. But it sounded like a lot of
fun, so we went down, and then I ran into nearly 1,500 to 2,000 fans who also
liked Star Trek, who also had a reason for coming to science fiction and
fantasy, and had been touched by Star Trek because of this feeling they had. And
all of a sudden I had a family and a place to belong. And I've been an avid fan
ever since, going to as many conventions as I could. And one aspect of this
convention was costuming. And I'd always been sort of interested in theater and
that sort of thing, but never really involved. But here were all these people
who weren't really into theater and weren't performers, but they had all these
wonderful costumes and were going up and doing the masquerades. The next time
they had a convention, I was ready, and I had my first costume. It was a very
poorly made Mirror Mirror costume from the Star Trek episode Mirror Mirror. But
it was a beginning, and it was something, and all of a sudden I was involved,
and I had a part in a world where in my main life I didn't have much of anything
that I really belonged to. And through fandom and science fiction and belonging
to that world, I eventually learned how to belong in a normal world again. And
basically, it changed my entire life. I actually even became popular in high
school, which at the time that I started in fandom, I would have thought that
popularity was something I would never see. So, and then it grew from there. I
became a theater and drama major at UTA, and I now work as a professional singer
and performer and do a lot of costuming with that job and freelance costuming.
But my first love is still making characters come alive on the stage at science
fiction and fantasy conventions. Because I think that what I was searching for
at the time was a reality that I could fit into, and I think that's what the
other fans are searching for. And the masquerade gives me a chance to make that
dream become a reality.
We asked her to give us an example of bringing a science fiction character to
life through costuming. One of our most successful costume skits that we
designed, and I had some other people with me at the time, we went to Worldcon
in Boston, and we had a young fellow who was a good friend of mine and my little
sister did a Star Wars skit together. But what they did was the lights darkened
and the Star Wars theme came up, and all of a sudden, Luke Skywalker came flying
through the air doing somersaults onto the stage, stopped and did a one-handed
handstand, very precariously balancing, using the Force to hold him up. And then
Yoda came slowly onto stage, nodding wisely, and instructing him on the use of
the Force. He didn't get it right the first time, then he tried again the second
time, and finally succeeded with a perfect one-handed handstand, balancing with
the use of the Force. And then leapt up, did a couple more flying leaps and
somersaults in the middle of the air across the stage and left. standing ovation
by 9,000 screaming people who, for them, Star Wars was alive. We'll talk with
Teresa Patterson about fans and costuming next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. We're talking with Teresa Patterson,
Science Fiction fan and award-winning costume designer. Patterson believes that
the best costumes are those that make the science fiction or fantasy character
come to life for the viewers. Therefore, in addition to constructing the costume
itself, she also creates a setting and sort of a brief script to put the
character in. She takes us through one of her creations. Now, I also have
another one that has been extremely successful. It's called Morgan Le Fay. And
the character, basically, I was sitting around trying to think of what is a
really way-out character that's not all that well-known, but that could command
the stage and make that same kind of reality come about. And it occurred to me
that very little has been done with the sorceress, Morgan Le Fay, who's from the
Arthurian legend and who was the one that eventually defeated Merlin. And I
thought, if I can make this character do a spell on stage so that the audience
really believes it, that that would be an excellent kind of costume to do. So I
designed the costume. And of course, it's different than designing a costume for
a movie character or a television character because it was completely up to my
imagination what I wanted to do with it. So I used a lot of reds and blacks and
lots of gold and to create a total effect of color but somber evil color and
made a very large headdress with lots of sparkles on it to catch the light and
designed it in such a way so that it would give the impression of an evil
sorceress who had a lot of power and was a ruler in her own right and designed
the cloak so that it would actually fold out into a half circle so that it would
look like bat wings on the back. The costume was beautiful, but that's not
enough. What Patterson had to come up with was something for Morgan Le Fay to
do. Then she had to locate a soundtrack that would somehow convey the evil and
menace of the sorceress. Patterson did both of these things. Then she added a
little extra to the sound effects. And then I added a soundtrack record which
had thunder and lightning on it and went into my handy-dandy little stereo set
in the middle of the living room, bought a bunch of patch cords from Radio Shack
so that the room looked like Spaghetti'sville and patched it all together and
using a normal hand mic and a reverb effect from the speakers being on at the
same time as the recording managed to get an evil reverberating sound to the
voice, lightning and thunder in the background, this awesome evil music building
and flowing and a high climax and then fading out in the distance. So I had a
wonderful soundtrack and if the mic failed, I'd still be fine because I had it
all on tape.
Finally, she describes the presentation of the character at a convention before
a large audience. And the way the actual skit came off was something like this.
The stage would darken and then you'd see a red glow moving up onto the stage
and you'd see just the outline of this bizarre golden mask and a red-garbed
woman holding the red globe. And the music starts and starts to build and all of
a sudden the spell starts and then suddenly there's a burst of flame from the
red globe. And as the spell builds and she starts summoning the darkness, the
room gets darker for a moment and then there's another burst of flame and the
room starts to lighten just a little bit and the spell builds and builds until
finally she banishes the light from her and says darkness be gone and then
blasts this huge shot of fire blue flame straight up into the sky and the
darkness is gone. And then she tells you that she is Morgan Le Fay and then
demonstrates the costume and shows the wide wings of the bat and slowly walks
off as the thunder fades into the distance. Again, I got a standing ovation. The
costume has never not won a prize. It has always been first and second
everywhere I've taken it. And there are better costumes but it comes to life and
that's what the people are looking for is a way to bring their fantasies and
their dreams into reality so they can touch them so it's something they can
really have a tangible experience from. More with Teresa Patterson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Teresa Patterson is a science fiction
fantasy fan who was turned on by the idea of making familiar characters from the
field come to life for others. She goes to science fiction conventions with
carefully constructed costumes and colorful skits. She enters the masquerade or
some costuming competition with her creations and has won many awards. Costuming
is a fascinating part of science fiction fandom. We observed that there must be
some acting ability that goes along with it. Of course. But actually, I think
there's a bit of actress or actor in almost everyone who's into the fandom scene
at all and even people who aren't. It's just a matter of whether we can actually
do something with it or not. A lot of people just assume, well, that'll never
happen. I'll never get to do anything with it and they forget about that part of
their personality. I'm a little more stubborn. I intend to do it professionally
eventually and to some extent am doing that now with my performing as a singer
and dancer with the singing telegram companies and as a model and so forth. And
I've been in two science fiction movies as an extra, Logan's Run and Lathe of
Heaven, which both were a lot of fun. But it doesn't take an actor or an actress
to do these kind of things and I've seen a lot of really wonderful skits and
costumes and performances pulled off by people who had never even considered the
idea of being professional actors or actresses. They just want to make it real.
And that's all acting ever was, was just trying to make something real and
recreate something. It's just that what we do is a little different than your
typical stage play. But it should be no less entertaining and we're trying to
create it so that it's no less entertaining. Patterson usually works with a
group of friends in performing her masquerade skits who wondered how newcomers
took to costuming. Do they become converts fairly quickly? We don't have anyone
who's ever met or joined our group that hasn't immediately ended up in a
costume. Sometimes under protest the first time but they always end up under a
costume and then they always want more and more costumes and the next thing you
know we've got a whole new set of costumers. When we went to Boston we took five
people in four different costume skits. These five people I was the only one
who'd ever been to a WorldCon before. Most of them had never even been to a
major convention before. All they knew was they wanted to do the masquerade.
They loved science fiction and fantasy and fandom and they wanted to do the
masquerade and they had a lot of creativity and they were willing to listen to
suggestions and we all worked together and we came away with four awards. People
who nobody had ever heard of before we went up there to the WorldCon and won
four of the top awards. Best Presentation Overall, First Runner-Up for Best
Presentation, Star Wars Special Award Prize and First Runner-Up for Best
Fantasy.
We asked Patterson how she taught herself to do the elaborate costuming she's
doing now. I still don't know what I'm doing now.
I've learned a lot from other people and from lots of trial and error, mostly
trial and error. I discovered fabric glue when I was in desperation and it works
wonderfully on all kinds of things. When I started costuming, I really didn't
know anything about sewing at all. The idea of making clothes was the farthest
thing from my mind and it just happened that I needed a costume and I had to
figure out how to create this thing that you couldn't possibly buy in a store by
its very nature and the first costumes were very much trial and error but since
then, I've learned a lot of shortcuts, shortcuts that an average seamstress
would probably never use because they learned all the rules and I didn't and I
try to pass on those shortcuts and at a lot of the major conventions, they have
workshops where they discuss costuming and shortcuts that other people have
found and stage techniques and there are books and magazines out that cover
costuming and makeup and easy ways to do all these things. Any fan who's seen
some of Teresa Patterson's work can't help but be impressed. She's made many
characters from fantasy and science fiction live. We'll talk about some other
aspects of fandom on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio
Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. This will be our final show with Teresa
Patterson, science fiction fan and costume designer. Patterson talks about the
various types of science fiction fans. And our listeners should keep in mind
that in fan terminology, fin is the plural of fan. There are actually several
different level of fans. There are new fin, which are people who just discovered
that, oh, you mean there's somebody else that reads this stuff besides me? There
are true fin, who are the people who go to conventions on a live and die
situation and fandom is a way of life and will sell whatever they can sell at
the dealers' tables if they can make enough money to get back and forth between
the conventions and who literally, the convention society, is their social life.
Then there are a whole scope of people in between. There are what we call closet
fans who are the people who read the books, who watch the shows, who go to the
movies, but who have absolutely no idea that there's any kind of organization
out there whatsoever. There are the slightly organized fans, which are people
who realize that there is organization who maybe go to a con every now and then,
who every now and then get a chance to meet their favorite author, but who
really aren't that much into the convention scene. It's just something that they
like and every now and then they like to express the fact that they enjoy it.
And then, of course, there are the professional fin, which are people who
through their professions one way or the other have somehow gotten tied up with
the science fiction or fantasy genre and because they deal with it every day or
part of every day and because they must like it or they wouldn't deal with it to
some extent. They're fin too.
Serious science fiction fans who attend conventions live in a weird sort of
world with its own activities and even its own vocabulary. Both these aspects of
fandom are illustrated in the word folk singing. We asked Patterson to explain
it to us. Well, basically, like any other, when you take fandom as a microcosm
of people and that this is their social life when they're at a convention, you
have to deal with the fact that social life includes entertainment. And if
you're into science fiction and fantasy and you're doing something special like
a convention, you don't want to go out and entertain yourself by going to the
local bar or the local disco. That's boring. You want to do something that's
uniquely fandom. And so something that was developed through fandom is a thing
called filk singing. Filk singing is folk singing, sort of. Basically, filk
singing is a creation of songs that are performed by one person or many person
on or off key, it makes no difference, that were written specifically for the
audience of science fiction and fantasy listeners. Patterson says there can be
different kinds of filk singing, but that they all fulfill a need among science
fiction fans. Now, some of filk singing is very simple. It simply involves
taking a tune from a normal song and changing the words around to have something
to do with science fiction or fantasy, and usually those are funny and they're
the kind that you can get a lot of giggles off and everyone joins in. But the
more serious element is original songs that deal with very serious ideas like
the fact that man's finally reaching for space and the Columbia's here or the
fact that when are we really going to get to be dancing on the moon by the time
it actually happens I'll be too old and things like that. And filking is a whole
type of folk singing strictly for fans. And some fans don't like it because they
don't like the taking of other people's music and putting other lyrics to it.
But for most fans, it's a wonderful outlet for getting to know other people and
just sit around at night when there's nothing else to do and sing songs and get
a very close type of camaraderie that you only get in some other kind of very
close-knit group. Not all conventions have filk singing but the more intimate
ones where it really is a social life type situation do because it's a very big
part of the social life. Patterson's enthusiasm for science fiction and science
fiction fandom is obvious and infectious.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.